Welcome to this section of the course.
All of the videos in this section are focused on modifying the hidden states, which are the outputs
of the transformer blocks.
Of course, a lot of the concepts and code that you will learn about in this section are relevant for
any kind of causal manipulations in any part of the model.
In this first code demo, I will follow up on an observation from the previous section, which was that
when you modify the activations in one layer, that has an impact on what happens in later layers,
but not in earlier layers.
On the one hand, that is kind of obvious, but it does lend itself to lots of interesting analyses
that we can apply and experiments that we can run, for example, to investigate which layers are most
important for representing different features of text or different contextual information.
There's not much theory or math that you need here, so let me jump right into the overview of the code
demo.
I will use GPT two and create a hook that simply grabs the hidden states that were already calculated
in this layer, and then scale the whole thing down by some scaling factor and then return that scaled
output.
So here you see the hook function.
So I'm grabbing the output of this layer.
And in this case I've hardcoded this to be layer two.
And then I just scale by multiplying this hidden states tensor by some scaling factor, and then pack
up the output again into a tuple before returning it.
And actually you see that the way that I have written this code here does literally nothing.
I set the scaling factor to be one.
So I'm just multiplying the embeddings vectors by one.
But this here this is a globally defined variable.
It's not defined inside.
The function is defined outside of the hook function.
So it's global as global scope.
And that means that I can change this to be less than one or greater than one.
I can change this variable dynamically as I'm running experiments and exploring the impact of scaling.
And also just to be clear, in case this wasn't clear enough from the previous section, this variable
output here, this is the output of this layer.
So before I get this variable output, the model has already run through attention and MLP, adding
those adjustments back onto the residual stream layer norms.
ET cetera.
Everything that happens in Transformer Block two has already happened.
It's already been calculated.
And here I'm grabbing the results of all of those calculations.
And then I apply this manipulation and then replace the output with this modified version.
Okay, so what I return from this hook function ends up being the input into the next transformer block.
And another reminder this variable here this output variable.
This is a tuple.
It is not a tuple if you hook into the attention or MLP layers directly, but it is a tuple for the
final output of the transformer block.
Now the first element of this tuple, that's the thing that we want.
And it's also what hugging face refers to as the hidden states.
Now, whether there are other elements in this tuple depends on the inputs that you provide when calling
the forward pass through the model.
I'm going to discuss this explicitly and show some examples in a later video in this section.
For now, this tuple actually only has one element, so this variable rest will be empty.
But anyway, it's good to be in the habit of including this.
Otherwise it can cause some serious issues if you do have multiple elements in this output tuple.
Okay, so more on that in a future video.
I have a little bit of text to push through.
It is ten tokens.
And of course there are 13 hidden states 768 dimensions in GPT two.
Small.
Now what I have done is run the forward pass with this hook implanted and storing all of the hidden
states twice.
The first time I did the forward pass, I pushed all the tokens through with this scaling factor of
one.
That means that absolutely nothing happened, except that we wasted like a tiny bit of computation time
just to run this code here.
So that is the unscaled version of the data.
In other words, there were no manipulations or modulations of the activations.
That's a pure copy of the model internals.
Then I did a forward pass again with the same tokens, but now I set the scaling factor to be 0.5.
So that means now that all of the hidden states from transformer block two were scaled by a factor of
one half.
I didn't add any noise or swap the order of the dimensions or anything like that.
All I did was scale everything down, and that means that I now have two sets of hidden states, one
from the original version of the model and one with the scaled vectors in transformer layer two.
So, to gain some insight into the impact of scaling, I calculated the difference between the two sets
of hidden state matrices and then calculated the norm of that matrix.
And the idea is that if the two matrices are identical, then the norm of their difference is exactly
zero.
And that you see here for the embeddings layer and for the first two transformer blocks.
And then here it's in transformer block two where I introduced the scaling.
So now suddenly the matrix difference norm jumps up.
Now that part is not at all surprising.
I scaled it down by a factor of one half.
So of course there is.
There are some differences.
The interesting question is what happens in the layers thereafter?
You can imagine that the model would maybe adapt to the smaller activations and simply figure out a
way to scale up the smaller numbers, so that after a couple of layers, they end up being the same
as without the downsampling.
But actually, though, what ends up happening is that the two sets of matrices continue to diverge
as we get deeper into the model, although they do move towards each other at the final transformer
block.
So there is something at the very end that is able to compensate at least a little bit for the disruption
that happened earlier in the model.
By the way, this plot here shows the results excluding the first token.
It looks quite a bit different when we include the first token in this analysis.
Okay, so is this just a bunch of numbers or does this have any actual impact on the model's behavior.
And by behavior I mean the actual tokens that it generates and the distribution of the final output
logits over the vocab?
I will let you ponder the answer to that question, and what you think will happen to the model's ability
to predict tokens and generate new tokens.
We will do those kinds of investigations in later videos, but here in this demo, I'm really just going
to focus on the code implementations and the model internals.
Anyway, so here is the result of one experiment with one scaling factor of 0.5 compared to no scaling.
The next thing I'll do is repeat exactly this experiment, but looping over a range of scaling factors
from 0.5 to 1.5.
And you can see those results here.
So the left line plot.
So this plot over here shows the same result that I just showed here.
But here this was for one experiment scaling at 0.5.
And here we have a bunch of lines corresponding to different scaling factors.
This purple line up here on the top corresponds to a scaling factor of 0.5.
So that's the one that I showed over here.
And there's a lot of lines here.
And they show a non-linear pattern.
So they go down and then up again.
So therefore I thought it would be easier to view this whole thing as an image.
And that's what you see here on the right.
So each row in this image corresponds to a line in this plot.
And the color in this image corresponds to the height in this line plot over here.
It's pretty neat to see that the impact of scaling increases as we get deeper in the model for all the
scaling factors.
But it becomes relatively more intense for the scaling factors further from one.
And you also see the final transformer block is able to compensate for these different values or these
scaling factors to some extent.
Okay.
So that's the overview.
I will have more to say about all of these plots when I discuss them in code, which is what I will
do right now.
So import some libraries here.
Here I'm importing GPT two.
And here I'm creating the hook just like what you saw in the slides.
Okay.
And so again yeah I'm grabbing the output, unpacking it because this is a tuple.
And here I'm making a copy of that tuple and then scaling it or sorry, copy of the hidden states.
This part is actually not necessary.
You can modulate these directly, but it's never a bad idea to explicitly make a copy.
And then using this in-place method on this PyTorch tensor to multiply by this scaling factor.
So this is an in-place method, which means that it's not like a function where we need to write something
like this.
It just works directly on the object, this tensor, without having to redefine it like this.
And how do you know if a method or a function works in place, or whether it provides an output and
you would need something like this.
Sometimes you just have to look it up, but you can also get an indicator with this underscore at the
end of the function.
In general, in Python, when you see methods or functions that end with an underscore, that doesn't
guarantee that they are in-place operators, but that is fairly common.
Okay, so then I pack it up here.
Actually this is slightly different formulation from what I showed in the screenshot in the code.
But either one of those is fine.
Okay.
So yeah hard coding this to go into block two which is fine.
In the next videos we will make this a little bit more dynamic and soft coded.
Okay.
Here is some text.
Duct tape will be very useful after the apocalypse.
That's probably true.
I don't want to be there to find out.
Okay, let's see here.
I'm redefining the scaling factor as one.
I technically do not need that line of code because it's already up here.
But just because I'm going to call this variable hidden states, pure or clean or unadulterated.
Then I just want to make sure, in case we change this later, that it is really going to be set to
one for these variables over here.
Okay.
So I get the hidden states output and then rename those to hidden states pure.
And then yeah this is what you've seen before.
Okay.
So now I'm running exactly the same code.
So this is still the same same tokens.
Everything like that is the same.
But I'm changing the scaling factor from 1 to 0.5.
And it's really important when you're doing this that the name of the variable is exactly the same as
what goes into this function over here.
When Python runs this function, it is going to search for a variable called scaling underscore factor.
And that variable is not defined here locally in the function.
So therefore Python will search for a global definition of this of of this variable which is here.
But that means that if you would change this to like CamelCase.
If you would do this.
This is not going to work.
Okay, so you need to be very mindful of the spelling and capitalization and all that good stuff.
Okay, so now I get the scaled version of these hidden states here I'm extracting from this layer,
uh, from the first element in the sequence or in the batch, uh, which is only one sequence, uh,
all of the tokens, except for the first one.
I'll show you in a moment what it looks like when we include the first token and all of the embeddings
dimensions.
So get that and then.
So that's for the pure hidden states, the scaled hidden states.
And then I literally just subtract them and calculate the matrix norm.
Technically you could also do all this stuff with PyTorch but I'm just converting it here into numpy.
Okay.
Again the idea is that this is not telling us whether the pure or the scaled versions are bigger or
smaller or how they changed.
If some vectors got bigger, other vectors got smaller.
If they were rotated in different directions, that is all information that is more nuanced than what
the norm will tell you.
The norm simply tells you how far apart are these two matrices from each other.
And if these two matrices are identical so they're not far apart, then their difference matrix will
be zero and the norm will be zero.
And the further the numerical values are in these matrices from each other, the larger the matrix norm
is going to be.
Okay, so that's that.
And then I plot it here.
Now have a look at the y axis over here.
So it looks like most of these difference norms are 100 to 200.
This one's a little bit higher.
Whatever.
So 100 to 200.
Now what I'm going to do is just delete this one over here.
This means that we now have all of the tokens, Including the very first token.
And now we see that these norms went up a lot, right?
Remember it was like 100 to 200.
So those values were all the way down here.
And now it's just exploded by an order of magnitude, simply by including that very first token.
That is the I haven't counted the number of times I've demonstrated in this course that weird things
happen.
On the very first token, it must be at least 20, I think, by now.
So yet another demonstration of that.
And the point is, you know, I think these reminders are important because if you are doing this kind
of research, your entire research program and all of your results can be completely destroyed by incorporating
the first token in a sequence when, particularly when the sequences are relatively small.
Okay, so let's do this again.
Let me run that code again and run this code again.
And now this is shrunk back down to levels that a human would be happy with.
Okay, so now what I do is essentially repeat exactly that code that I just walked you through.
But I'm embedding all of that code into a for loop over a range of scale factors from 0.5 to 1.5.
And then you can see again, I'm being very careful to use exactly the same variable name that I'm using
here, for example.
Yeah.
If I would do scale factor I don't know with a capital R here at the end.
Now, what this means is that the scaling factor is going to be 0.5 for every single run.
Why is it going to be 0.5.
Because Python is going to ignore this variable and look for something that's called this, which I've
previously set to 0.5.
Okay.
Anyway, with GPT two small, uh, and with such a short sequence of tokens, even running this on the
CPU is still very fast.
That was three seconds to do to run this 21 times I think.
Yeah pretty fast.
Okay.
Yeah.
So now I'm creating this plot.
And then what you see here is that all of these lines are going up and then down.
Right.
So they start off very high and each successive line gets lower until we have basically a flat line.
And in theory if we get a scaling factor of exactly one in here, of course that would be a flat line.
And then it comes back up.
So there's this non-linear relationship between the scaling factor and the matrix norm.
It's not surprising.
Again, the matrix norm doesn't tell us exactly what is changing and how it's changing.
All it's telling us is that the two matrices are different from each other and how much the differences
are.
Okay, so that's why I thought it would be nicer to show this in a in an image like this where you can
really see black.
Here the norm is zero.
It's zero because I didn't actually change anything before layer two.
And then there is an almost but not quite symmetric, uh, impact of scaling when we scale below one
and above one.
So it kind of looks like the scaling has more of an impact as we go down, as we shrink compared to
when we expand these vectors.
If you still feel like you're struggling to understand some of the nuances of using forward hooks to
do causal experiments, then don't worry, you will get lots more practice over the next several sections.
One methodological point here it's always a good idea to run a forward pass with no causal interference
to use as a comparison.
So that's it for now.
See you in the next video.